Why did the biggest search operation in the history of Panama fail to find Kris Kremers and Lisanne Froon?
In the fourth and final episode of this series we will try to find answers to the many questions which are still haunting this tragic case.
The first item found is the backpack, which is discovered on June 11, 2014, ten weeks after Kris and Lisanne disappeared.
When the local population starts a search along the shores of the river, they find two shoes on June 18, one of these shoes, a left shoe which is later found to be from Lisanne, still contains a sock and a detached human foot. The other left shoe is later identified as belonging to Kris.
Continuing their search, the locals then find a left Pelvic bone.
Walking along the shores in upstream direction, they then find some torn dark blue fabric, which has never been properly identified but is suspected to have been the shorts of Lisanne.
Finally, on June 20, the shorts of Kris are found right next to the second cable bridge but slightly inland on the eastern shore.
Although the team wishes to continue the search further upstream, the weather then turns bad and due to the rough terrain it is deemed too dangerous to search upstream of the 2nd bridge.
On hindsight this probably explains why no remains are ever found upstream of the 2nd cable bridge, as due to the harsh terrain and bad weather it takes many months before these upstream area's are finally searched and by that time all remains have already been washed away.
On July 31, the search is continued far downstream of the 2nd cable bridge, and on August 2 a fragment of a rib bone from Kris is found, followed on August 29 by an upper and lower left leg bone of Lisanne.
All of these finds are made by locals, but sadly in most cases the find was poorly documented, often resulting in conflicting GPS coordinates. In some cases, like the shoe of Kris or the leg bones of Lisanne, the exact location of the find has never been established.
What is important to note is that all of these finds are close to the trail and in relatively easily accessible terrain far downstream.
Due to the bad weather and the high water levels, it took several months before the harsh terrain upstream of the 2nd bridge could be searched, by which time no further remains could be found.
Edwin Alvarez, the former prosecutor, later gave sharp criticism on his successor Betzaida Pitti, stating that a much bigger search should have been started upstream of the 2nd cable bridge, immediately after the backpack had been found, but although this would almost certainly have resulted in the discovery of far more remains, local SINAPROC experts rightfully deemed such a search too dangerous with the means they had at their disposal.
During the rainy season all of these streams are prone to sudden flash floods, with water levels rising by 2 meters or more, turning a friendly stream into a raging river. Only a few hundred meters upstream of the 2nd bridge, the shores of the river become almost vertical, making it impossible for anyone searching that part of the river to get to higher ground quickly enough once a flash flood arrives.
Sadly, by the time the weather improved and the upper slopes became accessible again, the raging river had washed away all further remains and nothing more could be found.
Even if one day we may find the night location, the chance of finding further remains of the two brave girls, is close to zero.
Sadly, due to this situation, very few remains of both girls were ever found. A total human skeleton consists of 212 elements, while from Lisanne only 28 elements were found, and from Kris only 2. This meant that it was not only impossible to determine the cause or time of death, but medically it was not even possible to declare either of the girls dead.
From Lisanne an almost complete left leg was found, divided in a complete foot, a lower leg bone, and an upper leg bone, together with a left shoe, a left sock, and torn remains of her shorts. Contrary to what is often reported, the various bones and the foot had come apart as a result of natural decomposition and not due to any trauma. Remarkable was that three metatarsal bones were found fractured, with clear signs of healing which indicates the fracture must have happened while Lisanne was still alive. Also Lateral periostitis as well as periostitis of the tibia were found, both usually caused by overloading the ankles and legs due to a limping stride or due to walking for a long time across an uneven surface.
The three fractured metatarsal bones may have been caused by a sliding fall, for instance caused by sliding down a steep slope, however it can also be caused by severely twisting an ankle. The combination of 3 broken metatarsals plus periostitis would have made walking extremely painful and most likely next to impossible after 3 to 4 days.
As stated earlier, from Kris only two elements were found, neither of which showed any signs of trauma. Unlike what is often reported in various media, the pelvic bone was not fractured but instead had naturally fallen apart during the decomposition process. Neither were any foreign chemicals found on the bones, as is often reported. The slightly whiter color was determined to have been caused by long exposure to direct sunlight.
In general, the condition of the remains seemed to indicate that both bodies decomposed at different locations: Lisanne most probably in shallow, fast flowing, water, and Kris at a dry place in direct sunlight. No marks from large predators were found on the bones, but several bones showed marks from roots and tooth marks from small animals.
Both shoes are found with their laces tied, and stearic acid is found in both shoes, indicating both girls must have been wearing their shoes when they died, which is somewhat remarkable given Lisanne her broken metatarsal bones which must have caused her a lot of pain.
The theory that at some time the girls suffered an accident when they slit down a steep slope was strengthened by several parallel deep tears in the back of Kris her shorts. No such tears were found in the front or sides of the shorts, which probably indicates a controlled slide at high speed in a sitting or lying stance.
Perhaps more remarkable was that thorough analysis of the fabric of the shorts found no traces of blood or any other bodily fluids, including acids produced during the decomposition of a body, which usually burn deep into the fabric of clothing. The only explanation for this is that Kris was NOT wearing her shorts when she died, a theory which was strengthened by the fact that the shorts were found with their buttons and zipper open, something which is unlikely to happen without human intervention.
Another item which has often caused controversy is the fact that the bra's of both girls were found in the backpack, indicating that at some time they must have taken these off. Opinions differ as to why this was done, but in general it should be noted that both girls must have lost a large amount of weight and it is possible that the bra's, as well as the shorts, no longer fitted.
When found, the backpack is in a good condition, but it is dirty and worn. Although it was hanging above the water when found, there is no doubt it has been wet in the past. One of the shoulder straps has partly detached, which may have been caused by wear, and there are various scratches in the fabric where it must have chafed against rocks.
One piece of fabric, measuring 30 by 15 millimeter, has become loose, with ragged edges, a damage which looks strangely consistent with the tears in Kris her short and may have been caused at the same time. On the outside of the backpack, mud and remains of vegetation are found. On the inside sand, leaves, and shells are found. DNA material of two women and a men is found on the backpack, but there is no match with Kris and Lisanne. By this time however, the backpack has been handled by several of the locals, none of whom followed the proper procedures.
No bodily fluids or acids are found on the backpack, making it unlikely either of the girls was actually wearing the backpack when they died, and the fact that Kris apparently at some time took off her shorts but did not put these in the backpack indicates that in their final moments the girls no longer had access to the backpack, having left it behind at some moment.
The camera, which was somewhat protected by its own camera bag, is wet and can no longer be used, but its memory card can still be read. The same is true for the iPhone, which can no longer be started. The Panamanian inspectors however manage to get the Samsung phone started, after drying it and replacing its battery.
After having been found on June 11, the backpack and its contents are collected at Alto Romero on June 13, and subsequently transported to the Netherlands on June 20 for further analysis at the dutch NFI technical institute. However, during this short period, Panamanian authorities or individuals manage somehow to print and edit pictures on the original memory card of the camera, contaminating the evidence and destroying the original state of the memory disk.
Due to this horrible breach of procedures, some mysteries, like for instance the missing image 509, can probably never be solved, while other images have been turned and degraded due to the Panamanian manipulations.
As the Panamanian's never manage to get the iPhone started, the state of its memory chips still remains pristine when the NFI dissembles the phone and uses specialized equipment to extract all data direct from the memory chips.
As a final remark, the plastic water bottle found inside the backpack was not among the items send to the Netherlands for further analysis. Apparently, the bottle still contained a small amount of water, and it was send to a Panamanian laboratory for analysis, however either the bottle or the analysis subsequently became lost as no further mention of this bottle is made anywhere.
One of the aspects which is carefully avoided in all interviews and reports is that the data retrieved from the camera and phones gives a start contrast to all earlier witness statements.
While we now know that Kris and Lisanne started the trail around 11:00 and subsequently reached the top of the Mirador around 13:00, before continuing down the Atlantic slopes, the whole search was based on the assumption that the girls left the language school at 13:10 and arrived at the start of the trail around 16:00, making it impossible for them to reach the Atlantic slopes.
How is it possible for all these witnesses to have been wrong?
The whole search operation was solely based on witness statements. Records from mobile phone operators, which should have shown at least the connection times and positions of Kris her iPhone, were only requested on April 8 and never properly analyzed, and by the time CCTV camera footage was requested, the all important footage was already overwritten.
The search area was based on the assumption that the girls could not have reached the continental divide before sunset, making it impossible they could have descended down the Atlantic slopes. The Bocas del Torro district, which included the Atlantic slopes participated with only one team and a few helicopter flights, as everyone was convinced Kris and Lisanne could not possibly have traveled this far.
The discovery of the backpack, and the remains, was made by local farmers, not by the official search teams, and these discoveries only happened because the heavy rains and strong currents carried these objects down to the more densely inhabited lower slopes.
In early April, high up on the mostly uninhabited higher slopes, far outside the search area and at the start of the rainy season, Kris and Lisanne never stood a chance of being found.
They were ill prepared and most likely never told anyone where they were going, but their fate was sealed during the first three days after their disappearance, when all important witness interviews were undertaken by well-willing but totally unqualified persons, most of whom had never seen Kris and Lisanne and did not even carry pictures of the girls with them, asking all the wrong questions and using incorrect procedures.
Wrong procedures by unqualitied persons resulted in incorrect witness statements, which were subsequently used to define the search area and the search operation. At the same time, the failure to quickly obtain CCTV and GSM evidence, deprived the police of any means of checking the correctness of the witness statements.
From the very first day, the biggest search operation ever undertaken in Panama never stood a chance as they were searching in the wrong area!
Foul play theories were a natural result of the fact that day after day passed by without a single trace of the girls, but instead of checking and re-defining the search area, the authorities then lost hope and declared the girls must have been abducted as they were not within the search area.
Despite all the rumors and wild theories, there was never any hard evidence for the involvement of a third party, and the police investigation into possible foul play was leading nowhere, being closed down without a single shred of evidence.
Sadly, the fact that gruesome crime stories sell a lot better than complicated accident investigations, is still causing lots of books and YouTube sites to invent ever wilder scenario's, and this is not only hurting the parents and family, but most of all also those who seriously search for any evidence of foul play.
There is no doubt many mistakes were made during the whole police investigation, and there are many inconsistencies in the various statements which rightfully should be researched. This also means the involvement of foul play can not be ruled out, but instead of simply inventing a wild theory and a lot of bloody graphics, this requires years and years of careful study to find the little snippets of evidence which were missed by the authorities. This work should absolutely continue as it is essential for understanding this case, but sadly such work requires a dedication which only few people can maintain.
The authorities never bothered to study why all their original data was wrong, simply jumping from one scenario to another, totally different, scenario as soon as the backpack was found, and, perhaps not surprising, the press just went along with this. Never asking any questions.
Although by now, eleven years later, we have a much better picture of how and why these night pictures were taken and what the location looked like, many of the original questions still remain unanswered.
In their documentary 'Answers for Kris' the parents of Kris Kremers walk the same trail themselves, trying to understand what may have happened to their daughter.
We are now at the spot where the last photo was taken, where Kris is shown.
This is the picture of Kris at 2 a.m. on April 1.
This is the same place.
It is clearly visible on the other side where the path continues.
We can still only go one way.
This is yes.
It's just as hard here.
It's just as hard here, I say.
Yes, you did.
You can see in the picture that she's making the movement.
In the picture, she is making the movement, standing in the middle of the river, on the rocks.
That they're going down the path.
That's what we're going to do.
If you walk up this path, two and a half hours later, they've tried to call an emergency number for the first time.
So we're going to see if we can get there.
And to see what the reason is to call an emergency number.
Although the parents of Kris turn back around 1.5 hours after passing the first stream, their conclusion is very clear: getting lost on this trail is next to impossible, and the same can be said about any accident. In their opinion it is clear that their daughter would have turned back soon after passing the first stream.
Although opinions differ on what may have gone wrong, even the dutch police agree that there are many open questions remaining.
Apart from that, there is a small hope remaining that some more remains may be found along the shore of the main river and upstream of the 2nd cable bridge, where earlier searches had to stop due to the bad weather.
Although the Panamanian authorities agree to one final search, this can only happen after the end of the rainy season, when the shores of the main river become accessible again.
The dutch part of the final search operation will consist of the dutch pathologist Frank van der Goot with two assistants, and once again a team from the RHWW search dogs, who will this time be stationed at Alto Romero, close to the shore of the river. The decision is made to search for five days near the places where remains were found earlier, while it is also hoped that the team might discover the exact place where the girls perished.
Sadly, despite all good intentions, this final search is above all characterized by a total failure to understand the dynamics of the area and the local weather.
Until the backpack was found, nobody had been paying any attention to the Atlantic slopes, and all too many simply assumed that the area beyond the Mirador was roughly comparable to the forests around Boquete, where all earlier search operations had been carried out.
Sadly, reality is very different.
Even today, all too often weather reports from Boquete or David are quoted when people ask questions on the weather on the Atlantic slopes. The area beyond the Mirador though, has its own climate which has little similarities with the situation at Boquete.
Quite apart from this, the idea that an expedition would be able to do any meaningful work, let alone find the night location, within five days, shows a gross failure to understand how wild and rough this terrain truly is.
Due to various miscommunications, warnings from Panama regarding bad weather and high water levels, never reached the organization, causing the search operation to be planned for January 2015, a decision which would doom most efforts.
After waiting for days for sufficiently good weather to allow the helicopters to fly, the dog team finally reached Alto Romero, but it instantly becomes clear that the situation there is totally different than they were expecting.
Meanwhile, the team of Frank van der Goot fares slightly better, searching downstream of the 2nd cable bridge and at a few spots between the first and second cable bridge, however by now the strong current has long ago carried all undiscovered remains away.
On one of his final days in Panama, Frank van der Goot walks the Pianista trail down to the 2nd stream, before following this stream for about 1000 meters down stream, past the point where it joins with the first stream.
In his report, he will write that the vegetation in this area is similar to that visible on the night pictures, and that anyone falling down the slopes between the Mirador and the first stream will end up in this part of the river bed.
Although he fails to find the night location, or any remains of the two girls, he will later use this observation to construct a theory that the two girls have fallen down a steep slope on their way back up the Mirador, ending up in the stream bed of the first stream, down stream of the 2nd waterfall. An area from which they will not be able to make their way back to the trail.
Eleven years later, in June 2025, when we ask Romain to walk the yellow route which Frank van der Goot indicated Kris and Lisanne must have taken, we do indeed find a striking similarity in vegetation between these places and the night location, however there are disadvantages of this theory too.
Sadly, these area's were never properly searched in April 2014 and if Kris and Lisanne did indeed end up somewhere in this area there would be little hope anyone would have seen or heard them.
However, it also remains possible that the girls never turned back and continued all the way along the trail before getting into trouble at the cable bridges, as some of the locals suspect.
Although the January 2015 search fails to find more remains of Kris and Lisanne or any clear answers to many of the still remaining questions, both parents will finally agree that there is nothing more that can be done.
The parents of Lisanne had accepted the accident theory earlier already, shortly after the publication of the NFI report.
Lisanne fell and became trapped, they are convinced of that by now.
The NFI found multiple fractures in the bones of her foot.
These fractures must have happened while she was still alive, otherwise you can not get these fractures.
Most probably this has happened because she fell or slit down from a great height.
Than these fractures can happen.
When they told me that, I personally felt okay, some accident has happened to them there.
But although the parents finally accepted this scenario and found peace with it, many others still have doubt about the outcome of the final report, and even the dutch police themselves are not completely convinced.